AI #1837: Add dataset mapping documentation file (#1869)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: guidelines/data-generators/column-mapping-documentation.md

# Column Mapping Documentation

## Overview

> Column mapping documentation describes how a data generator transforms native billing data into FOCUS columns. This documentation helps practitioners validate FOCUS data accuracy, reconcile discrepancies with native billing, and understand transformation logic.

Reviewer: ### Note for consistency review

In one of the open PRs, we are introducing the glossary term **Native dataset**. We are also considering adding glossary entries for **FOCUS column**, **Custom column**, and potentially **Native column**.

For reference, below are draft descriptions of what these terms would represent. These definitions are still subject to refinement.

- **Native dataset**: A dataset provided by a [*data generator*](#metadata.datagenerator) in a format other than FOCUS. For [*service providers*](#glossary:service-provider), this typically refers to their proprietary data exports (e.g., billing exports, contract details, or other FinOps-related datasets). For FinOps tool vendors, this refers to any non-FOCUS dataset they offer to [*practitioners*](#glossary:practitioner).

- **FOCUS column**: A column defined by FOCUS and included in a FOCUS dataset.

- **Custom column**: A column not defined by FOCUS, prefixed with `x_`, and included in a FOCUS dataset.

- **Native column**: A column included in a Native dataset.

Reviewer 2: Disregard. It became clear on a re-read.

> Column mapping documentation describes how a data generator transforms native billing data into FOCUS columns. This documentation helps practitioners validate FOCUS data accuracy, reconcile discrepancies with native billing, and understand transformation logic.

Reviewer 3: Recommend some rephrasing here.  I think we should not imply that FOCUS datasets are transformed versions of native datasets.

I also suggest we change the scope of this document from "column mapping" to "dataset mapping", given FOCUS' embrace of multiple datasets starting with 1.3.

```suggestion
Dataset mapping documentation describes the relationship between a data generator's native datasets and corresponding FOCUS datasets. This reference helps practitioners validate the accuracy of FOCUS data, reconcile it against native billing data, and understand the specific definitions used to populate FOCUS fields.
```

Author: Accepted.

> This section provides guidance for data generators who wish to publish mapping documentation. The guidance is informative and does not establish conformance requirements.

Author: During TF-3, we talked about taking the remaining files within the guidelines and putting the remaining files into a "contributors" file, which I'll execute after this.

## Recommended Content

> Mapping documentation should include the following information for each FOCUS column present in the data generator's dataset:

Reviewer 3: Which "dataset" are we talking about here?  Native, or FOCUS? 

```suggestion
Mapping documentation should include the following information for each column included in the FOCUS dataset:
```

Author: Accepted.

| Property | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| FOCUS Column | The FOCUS column identifier (e.g., `BilledCost`) |
| Source Field(s) | Native billing column name(s) that map to this FOCUS column |
| Transform Logic | How the native field value is converted to the FOCUS column value |

> | Feature Level | Mandatory, Conditional, or Optional |

Reviewer 3: This should probably mention FOCUS, the same way the other columns do.

```suggestion
| Feature Level | The requirement level for the FOCUS column's inclusion in the FOCUS dataset (Mandatory, Conditional, or Optional) |
```

Author: Accepted.

### Formula Mapping

| FOCUS Column | Source Field(s) | Transform Logic | Feature Level | Notes |
|--------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------|-------|
| ListCost | `pricing/publicOnDemandRate`, `lineItem/UsageAmount` | Formula: `publicOnDemandRate * UsageAmount` | Mandatory | |

### Not Available

| FOCUS Column | Source Field(s) | Transform Logic | Feature Level | Notes |
|--------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------|-------|
| CapacityReservationId | — | Not Available | Conditional | Native billing does not expose capacity reservation identifiers |

## Documentation Variations

Data generators should document variations in mapping logic that depend on:

* Billing account type or agreement structure
* Product line or service family
* Pricing model or commitment type (e.g., on-demand, reserved, spot)
* FOCUS version, when mappings change across versions
* Edge cases where native columns map to different FOCUS columns based on context

## Accessibility

Data generators publishing mapping documentation should:

* Make documentation publicly accessible without authentication

> * Version documentation to align with supported FOCUS versions

Reviewer 3: Make the bullets verbs.  Also, make explicit an expectation around specific version number(s).

```suggestion
* Align version documentation with supported FOCUS versions. 
* Ensure the documentation clearly states which FOCUS version (e.g., 1.0 vs 1.1) it applies to
```

Author: Accepted.

* Provide clear guidance on where practitioners can locate the documentation (e.g., include a URL in FOCUS metadata or reference it from the provider's FOCUS data export documentation)

## Reference Template

> The [FOCUS Conformance Submission Workbook](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11s3xr1gUlJt6isrhuYGgaTU7XE5ZPTek/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=105511592610552198421&rtpof=true&sd=true) provides a reference template for mapping documentation. Data generators may use this template or provide equivalent documentation in their preferred format, provided the documentation addresses the recommended content described above. Where feasible, data generators are encouraged to provide mapping documentation in both human-readable and machine-readable formats (e.g., JSON, YAML, CSV).

Reviewer 3: This mention of JSON/YAML/CSV begs the inclusion of an example.

Author: Added a JSON example showing two mapping entries (Direct and Conditional patterns) at the end of the Reference Template section.

> The [FOCUS Conformance Submission Workbook](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11s3xr1gUlJt6isrhuYGgaTU7XE5ZPTek/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=105511592610552198421&rtpof=true&sd=true) provides a reference template for mapping documentation. Data generators may use this template or provide equivalent documentation in their preferred format, provided the documentation addresses the recommended content described above. Where feasible, data generators are encouraged to provide mapping documentation in both human-readable and machine-readable formats (e.g., JSON, YAML, CSV).

Reviewer 3: This links to v1.2 of the FOCUS Conformance Submission Workbook.  You have not mentioned the version here.  Can we instead link to a version-independent artifact that we will not have to go back and update each release?  If not, making specific mention of the version is necessary, but this will be outdated as soon as we have a 1.3 conformance program.

Author: Version-stamped the link as "(v1.2)". No version-independent artifact exists today. This will need updating when 1.3 conformance lands.

Reviewer 4: once we move to a new version is there any reason to "go back" to the older version (as spec developers?). I would like to avoid having a link that will get out of date/need updating all the time if possible. At a minimum updating the link shouldn't leave older links scattered around branches and releases. If we use a link redirect then we update it once outside the spec to point to the latest document and all branches etc have the right link? 

Happy to discuss more @Matt-Cowsert the foundation has some things that could support this.

Author: Thanks for the help @mike-finopsorg I've made the file standalone, adjusted the format so we can add additional datasets as we release them, adjusted the URL, and the hyperlink text. Leaving open until you can review, but expecting to resolve before we get to members this week.

Reviewer 3: @Matt-Cowsert 
Having the evergreen link is helpful.  A couple related things, though:

1. Could you add a README tab and link to that instead?  Linking to one and only one of the datasets feels strange, especially as our dataset list grows.

2. The Contract Commitment tab of that spreadsheet you linked has Cost and Usage examples:

> BillingPeriodEnd
> ChargeCategory
> BillingAccountId
> SkuPriceId

Can you please address that?

Author: @shawnalpay I've made the adjustments to the file, added a readme tab, and updated the references. Open to more feedback if you have it, need to check which tab the URL is linking to, but can work with the shared services team to make the adjustment to the readme if it doesn't default to the first tab.

Reviewer 3: Looks good.  Assuming that new finops.dev link will go live, then I'm good here.

Author: Both addressed:

1. Added a README tab to the workbook as the landing page, with usage instructions and links to help resources
2. Replaced the Contract Commitment tab examples with actual CC columns (ContractPeriodEnd, ContractCommitmentCategory, ContractId, ContractCommitmentCost)

Thanks @mike-finopsorg for getting the redirect set up.
